[SYCL][DOC] Add initial spec draft for new default devices and queues (#15382)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_global_defaults.asciidoc

> = sycl_ext_oneapi_global_defaults

Reviewer: This name doesn't seem right anymore.  Maybe rename it to "sycl_ext_oneapi_current_device"?  This will affect:

* The name here
* The name of the feature-test macro
* The name of the ".asciidoc" file

:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2024 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 9 specification.  All

references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extensions:

* link:../supported/sycl_ext_oneapi_defaultcontext.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_defaultcontext]
* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions]
* link:../supported/sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_barrier.asciidoc[

>   sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_barrier]

Reviewer: I don't think this extension depends on any of these anymore.

Author: Oh I'd done that but must've missed a commit.

== Status

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback.  Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state.  The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized.  *Shipping software products should
not rely on APIs defined in this specification.*

== Overview

This extension introduces additional state into SYCL in order to simplify 
programming for developers. The extension provides a mechanism to both set and
query the 'current' global `sycl::device`. By adding the notion of a 'current'
device, this can simplify interfaces and reduce the amount of boilerplate code
required to write a SYCL application.

This extension also introduces the notion of a default queue for a device. When
combined with the notion of the current device and the extension for new 

> free enqueue functions, this allows for a simplified way to write SYCL code.

Reviewer: Delete this paragraph.  The extension no longer adds the concept of a default queue.

== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_GLOBAL_DEFAULTS` to one of the values defined in the table

> 

Reviewer: Remove this blank line too.

below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if
the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|Initial version of this extension.
|===

=== New free functions

This extension adds the following new free functions:

'''

[frame=all,grid=none,separator="@"]
!====
a@
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::this_thread {

sycl::device get_current_device();

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::this_thread
----
!====

_Returns:_ The current default device for the calling host thread. If `set_current_device()` 
has not been called by this thread, returns the device selected by the default device selector.

> _Remarks:_ Calling this method from within a host task or an asynchronous error handler is
> undefined behavior.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if @gmlueck agrees, but I can't think of another case where we've used _Remarks_ to describe UB.

Maybe it's better to flip this, and describe the intended usage:

```suggestion
_Preconditions:_ The function is called from a host thread, executing outside of a host task or an asynchronous error handler.
```

Or, if it's not _really_ UB but just an example of potentially dangerous behavior, it might be better to say something like:

```suggestion
_Preconditions:_ The function is called from a host thread.

[_Note_: Since this function relates to the environment of the calling thread, it is the user's responsibility to ensure that it is called by the correct thread. For example, it is unsafe to call this function inside of a host task, within an asynchronous error handler, or within other functions that may be executed asynchronously, since these operations are not guaranteed to execute on any specific thread.{endnote}]
```

I'm personally inclined to go with the second option here, because I think there are a lot of other potentially dangerous cases that aren't listed (e.g., within `std::async`, within `std::for_each(std::exec::par, ...)`, within an OpenMP task...).

Calling this function on the device is UB either way, so we should call that out.

> 

Reviewer: Horizontal line here.

Reviewer: This comment

[frame=all,grid=none,separator="@"]
!====
a@
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::this_thread {

void set_current_device(sycl::device dev);

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::this_thread
----
!====

_Returns:_ Nothing

_Effects:_ Sets the current default device to `dev` for the current host thread.

_Remarks:_ Calling this method from within a host task or an asynchronous error handler is

> undefined behavior.

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above.  We should align these two.  There might be a clever way to avoid duplicating the non-normative note I proposed, like moving it to the synopsis.

combined with the notion of the current device and the extension for new 
free enqueue functions, this allows for a simplified way to write SYCL code.

== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_GLOBAL_DEFAULTS` to one of the values defined in the table
below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if
the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|Initial version of this extension.
|===

=== New free functions

This extension adds the following new free functions to the `sycl` namespace:

'''

[frame=all,grid=none,separator="@"]
!====
a@
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

sycl::device get_current_device();

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----
!====

_Returns:_ The current default device. The initial device returned is the device

> returned by the default device selector.

Author: Yeah I had some reason I went sour on "default" but forgot what it is.

'''

'''

[frame=all,grid=none,separator="@"]
!====
a@
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

void set_current_device(sycl::device dev);

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----
!====

_Returns:_ Nothing

> _Remarks:_ Sets the current default device to `dev`.

Author: Mentioned as an open at the bottom.

'''

The following free functions provide new overloads of existing functions:

==== Device allocation functions
'''

[frame=all,grid=none,separator="@"]
!====
a@
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

(1) void* sycl::malloc_device(size_t numBytes, const property_list& propList = {});

template <typename T>
(2) T* sycl::malloc_device(size_t count, const property_list& propList = {});

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----
!====

_Constraints:_ The same restrictions as other overloads of `sycl::malloc_device` apply.

_Returns (1):_ The same result as computed by:

[source, c++]
----
sycl::malloc_device(numBytes, 
                    get_current_device(), 
                    get_current_device().get_platform().ext_oneapi_get_default_context(), 

>                     propList)

Author: Yes, the intent is that a device's default queue will use the device's platform's default context.

void* sycl::free(void* ptr);
                              
} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----
!====

_Constraints:_ The same restrictions as other overloads of `sycl::free` apply.

_Returns:_ The same result as computed by:

[source, c++]
----
sycl::free(ptr, 
           get_current_device().get_platform().ext_oneapi_get_default_context())
----

_Remarks:_ The context is provided by the default context of the platform of the 
current device.

'''

=== Additions to the `usm_allocator` class

[frame=all,grid=none,separator="@"]
!====
a@
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl {
class usm_allocator {
    usm_allocator(property_list propList = {});
}                             
} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----
!====

_Returns:_ The same result as computed by:

[source, c++]
----
usm_allocator(get_current_device().get_platform().ext_oneapi_get_default_context(),
              get_current_device(),
              propList)
----

'''
=== Additions to the `queue` class

[frame=all,grid=none,separator="@"]
!====
a@
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl {
class queue {
    ext_oneapi_get_default_queue();
}                             
} // namespace sycl
----
!====

> _Returns:_ The default queue for the device.

Author: Yes.

----

|====

==== Command barriers

The functions in this section are only available if the
link:../supported/sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_barrier.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_barrier] extension is supported.

|====
a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

void barrier();

}
----
!====
_Effects_: The same result as computed by:

[source, c++]
----
barrier(get_current_device().ext_oneapi_get_default_queue())
----

a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

void partial_barrier(const std::vector<sycl::event>& events);

}
----
!====
_Effects_: The same result as computed by:

[source, c++]
----
partial_barrier(get_current_device().ext_oneapi_get_default_queue(), events)
----

[_Note:_ If `events` is empty and a partial barrier has no other dependencies
(e.g., specified by `handler::depends_on`), it is not required to wait for any
commands unless the `queue` is in-order. Implementations may be able to
optimize such partial barriers.
_{endnote}_]
|====

== Issues
. [UNRESOLVED] Should the currrent device be global or should we also support a per-thread

>    device?

Reviewer 2: FWIW, the CUDA versions are always per-thread: https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html?highlight=cudaSetDevice#device-selection

I can see this behavior being useful for something like an OpenMP+SYCL application -- you could call `set_default_device()` on each OpenMP thread to round-robin assign your devices to threads, then not worry about it again.

Reviewer: Some thoughts here that are relevant if we decided that each thread has its own default device:

* We should clarify the behavior when a new thread is created.  Does the new thread inherit the parent thread's default device?  If not, is the initial default device for the new thread guaranteed to be the device selected by the default selector?  Or, is the initial default device for a new thread unspecified?

* We have discussed in the past the possibility of expanding the set of APIs that can be called from a host task.  It is possible that we will allow a host task to call some of the APIs in this extension.  If that happens, what guarantees does the application have about the default device in a host task?

the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|Initial version of this extension.
|===

=== New free functions

This extension adds the following new free functions:

'''

[frame=all,grid=none,separator="@"]
!====
a@
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

sycl::device get_current_device();

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----
!====

_Returns:_ The current default device. The initial device returned is the device
returned by the default device selector.
'''

'''

[frame=all,grid=none,separator="@"]
!====
a@
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

void set_current_device(sycl::device dev);

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
----
!====

_Returns:_ Nothing

_Remarks:_ Sets the current default device to `dev`.

'''

The following free functions provide new overloads of existing functions:

==== Device allocation functions
'''

[frame=all,grid=none,separator="@"]
!====
a@
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

> (1) void* sycl::malloc_device(size_t numBytes, const property_list& propList = {});

Reviewer: Our style is to put these numeric callouts to the right of the API synopsis.  In addition, insert extra spaces to line them up vertically within a synopsis code block.  See [here](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler.asciidoc#new-free-functions-to-create-and-build-kernel-bundles) for an example.

_Effects_: The same result as computed by:

[source, c++]
----
nd_launch(get_current_device().ext_oneapi_get_default_queue(), c, k, reductions)
----

a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

template <typename KernelName, int Dimensions, typename... Args>
void nd_launch(sycl::nd_range<Dimensions> r,
               const sycl::kernel& k, Args&&... args);

}
----
!====
_Effects_: The same result as computed by:

[source, c++]
----
nd_launch(get_current_device().ext_oneapi_get_default_queue(), r, k, args)
----

a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

template <typename KernelName, int Dimensions,
          typename Properties, typename... Args>
void nd_launch(launch_config<sycl::nd_range<Dimensions>, Properties> c,
               const sycl::kernel& k, Args&& args...);

}
----
!====
_Effects_: The same result as computed by:

[source, c++]
----
nd_launch(get_current_device().ext_oneapi_get_default_queue(), c, k, args)
----

|====

==== Memory operations

|====
a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

> void memcpy(void* dest, const void* src, size_t numBytes);

Reviewer: I predict that many users will be confused, thinking this is a synchronous operation.  For example, `syclex::malloc_shared` and `syclex::memcpy` are both memory operations.  How are users supposed to know that the first is synchronous while the second is asynchronous?

Maybe we should add the suffix "_async" to all the functions that are asynchronous?

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how I feel about the idea of an "_async" suffix at this point.  I'm a little worried that explicitly calling out that some functions are asynchronous would introduce the opposite problem to what you're trying to solve: because functions like `submit` and `parallel_for` aren't called `submit_async` and `parallel_for_async`, a new developer might conclude they're synchronous.

(Aside: I would be okay with introducing an "_async" suffix if that's the direction C++ takes for its asynchronous STL functions, but then we'd need to roll out the suffix everywhere and deprecate the previous function names.)

Another potential fix would be to say that all these default queue shorthands are blocking...?  I guess then there's a confusion that `sycl::memcpy(dest, src, numBytes)` is synchronous but `sycl::memcpy(q, dest, src, numBytes)` is asynchronous...

Reviewer: > I'm a little worried that explicitly calling out that some functions are asynchronous would introduce the opposite problem to what you're trying to solve: because functions like `submit` and `parallel_for` aren't called `submit_async` and `parallel_for_async`, a new developer might conclude they're synchronous.

I was thinking that we could add "_async" to all of the asynchronous functions in the [sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions.asciidoc) extension, but we would leave the functions in SYCL 2020 named as they are now.

= sycl_ext_oneapi_global_defaults

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2024 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 9 specification.  All

> 

Reviewer: This blank line is still not deleted.

below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if
the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|Initial version of this extension.
|===

=== New free functions

This extension adds the following new free functions:

'''

[frame=all,grid=none,separator="@"]
!====
a@
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::this_thread {

sycl::device get_current_device();

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::this_thread
----
!====

_Returns:_ The current default device for the current host thread. If `set_current_device()` 
has not been called by this thread, returns the device selected by the default device selector.

_Remarks:_ Calling this method from within a host task or an asynchronous error handler is
undefined behavior.
'''

'''

[frame=all,grid=none,separator="@"]
!====
a@
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::this_thread {

void set_current_device(sycl::device dev);

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::this_thread
----
!====

> _Returns:_ Nothing

Reviewer: This still needs to be deleted.

> _Effects:_ Sets the current default device to `dev` for the current host thread.

Reviewer: This still needs to be done.

> _Effects:_ Sets the current default device to `dev` for the current host thread.

Reviewer: This comment

[source, c++]
----
mem_advise(get_current_device().ext_oneapi_get_default_queue(), ptr, numBytes, advice)
----

|====

==== Command barriers

The functions in this section are only available if the
link:../supported/sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_barrier.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_barrier] extension is supported.

|====
a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

void barrier();

}
----
!====
_Effects_: The same result as computed by:

[source, c++]
----
barrier(get_current_device().ext_oneapi_get_default_queue())
----

a|
[frame=all,grid=none]
!====
a!
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

void partial_barrier(const std::vector<sycl::event>& events);

}
----
!====
_Effects_: The same result as computed by:

[source, c++]
----
partial_barrier(get_current_device().ext_oneapi_get_default_queue(), events)
----

[_Note:_ If `events` is empty and a partial barrier has no other dependencies
(e.g., specified by `handler::depends_on`), it is not required to wait for any
commands unless the `queue` is in-order. Implementations may be able to
optimize such partial barriers.
_{endnote}_]

> |====

Reviewer: There is `execute_graph` now also.

== Issues

> . [RESOLVED] Should the currrent device be global or should we also support a per-thread

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. [RESOLVED] Should the current device be global or should we also support a per-thread
```

Reviewer: This was never done either.

Reviewer: This comment
